In this video I'm going to show you how to test for inequalities in Python.
And I will also introduce you to the boolean data type. The boolean data type,
Also sometimes called a logical data type.
is one of the most important data types in computing, in particular in scientific computing.
Now if you're not familiar or maybe you've forgotten about inequalities and you have never heard of
booleans before, then don't worry.
It's actually a really simple concept as you will see in a moment.
So first a quick reminder about inequalities and inequality is kind of like an equals sign.
But it's a little bit less certain.
It's a bit more open ended.
So this statement here reads "four is greater than three" and that is obviously a true statement -- four is
greater than three.
So this bracket sign here is opening up towards the larger number.
So here you would say four is less than five.
So these are the first two symbols for inequalities.
Then there's two other symbols that are worth knowing.
And that is four is greater than or equal to.
That's how you pronounce this symbol here.
So greater than or equal to two plus two.
Now that's obviously true: four is not greater than two plus two Because two plus two equals four.
So four is equal to two plus two.
Here we say four is less than or equal to three plus two and again that's also true.
This side is five this side is four that's four is not equal to five but four is less than or equal
to five.
OK.
So you will see in a moment how to implement these four expressions in Python.
And before I switch to Python I'm going to introduce you to a data type that's called boolean, sometimes
it's also called logical.
Now in this data type there are only two values: true and false.
So this is just a binary data type something can be true or it can be false.
Now python and different programming languages will sometimes print out the words true and false and
sometimes they represent these as 0 and 1 where one is equivalent to true and zero is equivalent to
false.
So if you see one and zero, and they are a boolean or logical type, then this is not the number one.
And this is not the number zero.
This would be equivalent to trues, it's just a different way of representing true.
And this is a different way of representing false. That said, Python always prints
out the words true and false so it's even easier to remember.
All right.
Let's switch to Python and see how this stuff gets implemented.
So let's start off with a simple example.
I will say four greater than five.
So this is how you implement the greater than sign.
So now I'm going to press control enter on my keyboard and it says false.
And this is actually the correct result because four is not greater than five.
So it is incorrect -- it's false that four is greater than five.
Now if I want to see what true looks like I could write four less than five like this and that prints
out true.
Now I can also set a variable to be a boolean.
So let's say be the very I'm going to create this variable B equals let's say 10 less then and I'm going
to say three times three to show you that you can put an arithmetic expression on one side of this.
So B equals 10 greater than three times three.
This is a kind of weird looking expression if you're not familiar with boolean data types.
But the thing to keep in mind is that this whole expression here is going to give one output -- it's either
going to be true or false.
Now we know in this case this is going to be true because three times three is nine and ten is greater
than nine.
So this is going to be true.
And therefore I expect the value of b to be true.
Now that's not this true,
That was from the previous code that I ran.
OK.
So now I run this code again.
There's no output because we didn't request any output.
So I'm going to say print B and I can see that the value of B is true.
Now to prove to you that B is a boolean variable and not a string.
So it's not the word true, it's not the set of characters t r u e, it's actually the Boolean true.
I'm going to print out the type of this variable.
Now there's a special function in Python.
It's a built in function.
You can see it's a built in function because it's green when I typed it.
And that is called type.
So now what I'm requesting Python to do is print out not the variable itself but the type of the variable.
Now when I run this code you'll see this says class bool and this is shorthand for boolean.
So this is the data type or the class boolean.
OK.
Now let's see if I can set this to be false.
I'm going to say three point three three three.
Well this is still going to be ....
I wanted to get this to print the value of B.
This is still true because now three times three three three actually I can even show you what this
is.
So we're still at nine nine nine.
And in fact, the more threes they get here.
Basically this is just going to be closer and closer to 10.
I have to... let's say at a four over there.
And now this becomes false and this becomes false because three times 3 3 3 3 and then a 4 at the
end we'd get just a tiny tiny little bit over 10.
Okay.
So far I've showed you the strict inequalities: greater than and less than. What I'm going to
introduce you to now is greater than or equal to.
So let's start with that example that I showed in the slide.
So that was four is greater than or equal to two plus two.
So now I can press control enter and I get the answer true.
So that's true because four equals two plus two.
Now if I write two plus two plus one and I run it again and now I get false.
And that's because four is not greater than five and of course I could make this a minus sign and set
this to be true or I can set the right hand side of this inequality to be five.
And now I'm going to change this to be less than, so I was going to say four is less than or equal to five.
And now the answer is true.
The last thing that I want to introduce you to in this video before getting to the exercises is testing
for equality so now you know how to test for inequality if something is greater than or less than.
But how do you test if something is equal to? You might think it should be something like this.
And if you would just read this out like a mathematical expression this does seem like the right thing
to do: four equals two plus two and that is definitely true.
However in python a single equals sign like this is not used for equality.
It's used for variable assignment and that's like what you see up here.
So I'm setting the variable to be equal to the result of this expression.
So instead in Python you have to use a double equals sign like this.
So you say four equals equals two plus two.
It's kind of funny looking if you're new to programming, it looks a little weird but it is the right
thing to do.
Python outputs true.
And that's because 4 really is equal to two plus two.
And now if we wanted to store this outcome so the outcome true in a variable we could say create a new
variables like theTest equals the result of four equals equals two plus two.
So this is a funny looking expression because you have multiple equals signs floating around here.
But keep in mind that in Python a single equals sign is used to assign some output to some variable.
And here the variable is called the test and the double equals sign is used to test for equality.
So whether 4 is the same thing as two plus two.
OK.
So now I run this code and then I will print out the value of the test and we know that that's going
to be true. Double equals signs here are really important for using python as a tool for understanding
and learning mathematics.
And that's because if you try to work out some really complicated equation and you want to see if it's
equal to some simpler form of what you think is the same equation then testing for equality is the best
way to do that. Here is the exercise for this video.
What I have printed here is two inequalities.
four x plus three is less than 17 minus X squared and the second one is eight x minus two is less
than or equal to minus three times x plus forty two. And up here I have three different options for x.
So x can equal 2, X can equal three and X can equal four.
So what you have to do in this assignment is implement these two inequalities in Python and then test
for these three different values of X, and what you want to do is figure out which values of x will make
these expressions true.
So just to make sure this is clear, I'm going to give a simple example where X equals zero.
So that's not one of these options.
But imagine if X were equal to zero then this first expression here would be zero plus three is less
than 17 minus zero.
So basically three is less than 17.
That statement is true.
So therefore when x equals zero
this entire statement is true.
All right.
So pause the video, implement this in Python.
And check for these two expressions which values have X from this set of three values will make these
two expressions be true.
Okay so the way that I'm going to implement this is by setting all of these variables so x equals two
X equals three and x equals four.
And then I'm going to basically uncomment these out one at a time and check whether they make the expression
true.
So let's start with the first one that was I'm going to print this out.
That was four times x plus three is less than 17 minus X.
Remember X squared is not the caret symbol but it is the two asterisks, two multiplication signs.
Okay.
So what I'm going to do now is comment out these two options for X and I'm doing that by selecting the
code and pressing control slash on my keyboard.
Okay.
So now this is going to run for x equals two.
Okay so that's true and now I'm going to uncomment this line. Notice I'm not commenting this
line.
So when Python reads this line of code it says X equals three.
But then it gets the next line of code and it overrides X to be three instead of two.
I think I said three up here I meant two.
Okay.
So now this is false.
And now we can check here.
But if it's false for three It's certainly going to be false for four.
Okay.
So we've discovered that for this first equation, this first expression here, this is true only when x
equals two out of this set of three numbers.
OK.
So now I'm going to repeat this procedure for the second inequality.
So let's say print and that one was eight times X.
You might think that I have an amazing memory but I actually wrote down these equations on a different
monitor on my computer.
So I'm not just calling this all back from memory.
OK.
So that was eight times X minus two is less than or equal to minus three x plus forty two.
And again you have to be careful with this three X because if you're writing this out on paper you would
write just the three in the X immediately next to each other like this.
However in Python you have to explicitly put an asterisk here.
Okay.
So let's try this again.
I'll go starting from x equals two.
Now this says true true because it's also printing out this one.
So I think just to make things a little easier to comment on this line as well.
So x equals two makes this expression true X equals three.
Still makes this expression true an x equals four is also true.
So the second equation is true for all three of these values of x. In this video,
you learned about inequalities and the boolean data type. As you saw, the boolean data type is not so difficult.
It just has kind of a weird name but once you get used to it, these logical operators, then they become
really useful.
And in the next video you will see how to use these boolean or logical operators for a really important
command control statement called the if statement.